Clustering

Form of UML where obs are grouped into clusters based on similarities in data values/features. 
This is considered unsupervised because it doesn't make use of previously known label values to train model.
In clustering model, the label = the cluster to which the obs is assigned, based ONLY on its features.


For example
botanist obs sample of flowers and records the number of leaves/petals on each flower:
No known labels in the dataset, just two features. 
Goal is NOT to identify the different types of flower; 
just to group similar flowers together based on the number of leaves and petals.

            Leaves (x1)	Petals (x2)
            0	5
            0	6
            1	3
            1	3
            1	6
            1	8
            2	3
            2	7
            2	8


Training a clustering model
multiple algorithms you can use for clustering. 
most commonly used algorithms is K-Means clustering which has the follwoing steps:

       - The feature (x) values are vectorized to define n-dimensional coordinates (where n is the number of features). 
         In flower example, two features: number of leaves (x1) and number of petals (x2). 
         So, feature vector has two coordinates we can use to conceptually plot data points in 2D space ([x1,x2])
       - You decide how many clusters you want to use to group the flowers - value k. 
         E.g. to create three clusters, you would use a k value of 3. 
         Then k points are plotted at random coordinates. 
         These points become the center points for each cluster; centroids.
       - Each data point (flower) is assigned to its nearest centroid.
       - Each centroid is moved to center of data points assigned to it based on mean distance between points.
       - After centroid is moved, data points may now be closer to a different centroid, 
         so the data points are reassigned to clusters based on the NEW closest centroid.
       - The centroid movement and cluster reallocation steps repeat until clusters become stable 
         or a predetermined maximum number of iterations is reached.


Evaluating a clustering model
Since no known label with which to compare predicted cluster assignments, 
evaluation of a clustering model is based on how well the resulting clusters are separated from one another.

        There are multiple metrics that you can use to evaluate cluster separation, including:

        - Average distance to cluster center: How close, on average, each point in cluster is to centroid of the cluster.
        - Average distance to OTHER center: How close, on average, each point in cluster is to centroid of ALL other clusters.
        - Max distance to cluster center: furthest distance between point in cluster and itscentroid.
        - Silhouette: A value between -1 and 1 that summarizes 
          ratio of distance between points in the same cluster and points in different clusters 
          (The closer to 1, the better the cluster separation).