Create an Azure Machine Learning workspace


need to provision an Azure Machine Learning workspace w/ Azure subscription. 
Then use Azure Machine Learning studio to work with the resources in workspace.

        Select + Create a resource, 
        search for Machine Learning,
        create a new Azure Machine Learning resource 
        
        Settings:
                Subscription: Mine.
                Resource group: Create/select one.
                Name: Enter unique name for workspace.
                Region: closest.
                Storage account: default new storage account created for your workspace.
                Key vault: default new key vault created for your workspace.
                Application insights: default new application insights resource created for your workspace.
                Container registry: None (one created automatically first time you deploy model to container).
        
        Select Review + create, then select Create. 
        Wait for workspace to be created and go to the deployed resource

Select Launch studio 
Close any messages displayed.
AML studio, should see newly created workspace. 
OR, select All workspaces in the left-hand menu and select one you created



Use automated machine learning to train a model
Automated machine learning enables you to try multiple algorithms and parameters to train multiple models, and identify the best one for your data. In this exercise, you’ll use a dataset of historical bicycle rental details to train a model that predicts the number of bicycle rentals that should be expected on a given day, based on seasonal and meteorological features.

Citation: The data used in this exercise is derived from Capital Bikeshare and is used in accordance with the published data license agreement.

In Azure Machine Learning studio, view the Automated ML page (under Authoring).

Create a new Automated ML job with the following settings, using Next as required to progress through the user interface



Best model summary
Algorithm name
VotingEnsemble
Ensemble details


View ensemble details

calm_root_n17wzg85
