There are multiple types of machine learning; 
you must apply the appropriate type depending on what trying to predict.


Supervised machine learning (SML):
general term for ML algorithms where training data includes BOTH feature values and known label values.
It's used to train models by determining relationship between features & labels in past obs.
Then unknown labels can be predicted for features in future cases.


Regression (SML):
Form of SML where the label predicted is numeric value.
E.g. no. ice creams sold per day, based on the temp/rain etc, fuel efficiency based on car engine/weight etc


Classification (SML):
SML where label represents a categorization/class. Two common classification scenarios.

     1)Binary classification
       The label determines whether the observed item is (or isn't) an instance of a specific class.
       Effectively the model predicts one of two mutually exclusive outcomes. E.g.
        - Whether patient is diabetes risk based on clinical metrics(weight/age etc)
        - Whether bank customer will default on loan based on income/credit history etc.
       In these examples, model predicts a binary true/false or positive/negative prediction for a single possible class.

     2)Multiclass classification
       Extends binary classification to predict label that is one of multiple possible classes. E.g.
        - Species of a penguin (Adelie, Gentoo, or Chinstrap) based on physical measurements.
        - Genre of movie (comedy/horror/romance etc) based on cast/director/budget.
       In most scenarios with multiple classes, multiclass classification is used to predict mutually exclusive labels. 
       E.g. penguin can't be both Gentoo AND Adelie. 
       However, there are algorithms that you can use to train multilabel classification models where there may be 
       more than one valid label for a single obs (e.g. film could be science fiction AND comedy).





Unsupervised machine learning (UML)
Involves training models using data that with only feature values (no known labels). 
UML algorithms determine relationships between features of the obs & in the training data.


Clustering (UML)
Most common form of UML is clustering. 
Clustering algorithm identifies similarities between obs based on features & groups them into discrete clusters
     E.g. Group similar flowers based on size/leaves/number of petals.
          Identify groups of similar customers based on demographic/purchasing behavior.
Clustering has some similarities to multiclass classification; it categorizes obs into discrete groups. 
Difference is:
     - with classification, you already know the classes to which obs in the training data belong
       Therefore, the algorithm works by determining the relationship between features and known classification label. 
In clustering, there's no previously known cluster label and the algorithm groups the data observations based purely on similarity of features.

In some cases, clustering is used to determine the set of classes that exist before training a classification model. For example, you might use clustering to segment your customers into groups, and then analyze those groups to identify and categorize different classes of customer (high value - low volume, frequent small purchaser, and so on). You could then use your categorizations to label the observations in your clustering results and use the labeled data to train a classification model that predicts to which customer category a new customer might belong.
