AI services on the Azure platform

    AI services are AI capabilities that can be built into web/mob apps, w/simple implementation. 
    includes: image recognition, 
            natural language processing, 
            speech, 
            AI-powered search and more. 

Examples:
    - Azure AI Content Safety service can be used detect harmful content within text/images 
      inc violent/hateful content, and report on its severity. 
    - Azure AI Language service can be used to summarize text/classify info/extract key phrases. 
    - Azure AI Speech service provides speech to text and text to speech capabilities, 
      allowing rapid transcribed into text, or text to natural sounding voice audio.

Azure AI services based on 3 principles that improve speed-to-market:
        Prebuilt and ready to use
        Accessed through APIs
        Available on Azure

Azure AI services are prebuilt and ready to use:
        AI been prohibitive for all but largest technology companies because of factors:
            inc large amounts of data required to train
            massive amount of computing power needed
            the budget to hire specialist programmers.
        Azure AI services make AI accessible to businesses all sizes by using pre-trained machine learning models
        to deliver AI as a service. 
        Azure AI services use high-performance Azure computing to deploy advanced AI models as resources, 
        making decades of research available to developers of all skill levels.

Azure AI services are portfolio of services, with capabilities suitable for use cases across sectors and industries.

        e.g. in education, Immersive Reader is being used to support students by adapting to their requirements. 
             Learners can have varying needs:
                 read more slowly, 
                 get words or text translated into another language, 
                 see pictures to aid understanding. 
             Immersive Reader helps students with different needs learn at own pace, and own way.

Some AI services can be customized to better fit specific requirements. 
Customization capabilities in Azure AI Vision/AI Speech/OpenAI all allow add data to existing models.

        e.g. in sport, athletes, and coaches are customizing Azure AI Vision to improve performance and reduce injury. 
             One app allows surfers to upload video and receive AI-generated insights and analysis. 
             These insights can be used by coaches, medics, judges, and event broadcasters.


Azure AI services are accessed through APIs
designed to be used in different development environments, with minimal coding. 
Developers can access AI services through REST APIs/client libraries/integrate with tools such as Logic Apps and Power Automate. APIs are application programming interfaces; define the info that is required for one component to use services of other. 
APIs enable software components to communicate; one side updated without stopping the other from working. 

Azure AI services are available on Azure
AI services are cloud-based & accessed through Azure resource. 
Means they're managed in same way as other Azure services;
             platform as a service (PaaS), 
             infrastructure as a service (IaaS) 
             managed database service. 
Azure platform & Resource Manager provide consistent framework for all Azure services
(creating or deleting resources, availability and billing).

